VV: ComputeFeatureReferenceCAxisMisorientations fully V&V'ed (#1636)
BlueQuartzSoftware/complex: src/Plugins/OrientationAnalysis/vv/deviations/ComputeFeatureReferenceCAxisMisorientationsFilter.md

---

## ComputeFeatureReferenceCAxisMisorientationsFilter-D1

| Field            | Value                                                                                                                                |
|------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Deviation ID** | `ComputeFeatureReferenceCAxisMisorientationsFilter-D1`                                                                               |
| **Filter UUID**  | `16c487d2-8f99-4fb5-a4df-d3f70a8e6b25`                                                                                               |
| **Status**       | active (SIMPLNX fixed pre-V&V via PR #1438; legacy 6.5.171 still has the bug — backported to `v6_5_172` branch in commit `d4b5509aa`) |

> **Symptom:** Per-cell and per-feature outputs for non-hex features differ between SIMPLNX and DREAM3D 6.5.171. Legacy 6.5.171 computes a c-axis projection misorientation for *every* cell regardless of crystal structure, producing meaningless numeric values for non-hex cells (the projection treats the cubic cell's quaternion as if it were hex). For a feature whose cells are *all* non-hex, the legacy filter produces `featAvg = 0.0 or whatever-the-projection-yields` instead of the analytically-correct `NaN` — the per-cell loop accumulates numeric values into the avg, and the final division produces a finite result. The per-feature population stddev follows the same garbage pattern.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Symptom:** Per-cell and per-feature outputs for non-hex features differ between SIMPLNX and DREAM3D 6.5.171. Legacy 6.5.171s c-axis projection treats every cubic cell's quaternion as if it were hex. For a feature whose cells are *all* non-hex, the legacy filter produces `featAvg = 0.0 or whatever-the-projection-yields` instead of the analytically-correct `NaN`. The issue exists in the per-feature population stddev calculation as well.
```
This needs to be consolidated see above for example

The 6.5.171 `9.999988°` value is the projection of the cubic cell's identity-Quat-derived c-axis `[0,0,1]` against the test fixture's `AvgCAxes[F3] = [0, sin(10°), cos(10°)]` — i.e., the test fixture happened to pre-populate F3's avg-c-axis at a 10° tilt, and 6.5.171 produces ~10° as the "miso" for each cubic cell. On a real dataset, that value would be whatever-random-content `FindAvgCAxes` left in `AvgCAxes[F3]`.

**Affected users:** Any workflow that runs `FindFeatureReferenceCAxisMisorientations` on mixed-phase datasets in DREAM3D 6.5.171. Single-phase hex-only datasets are unaffected. The garbage values propagate into downstream statistics (per-feature average + stddev rows for non-hex features) but cell-level visualization may not surface the issue immediately.

**Recommendation:** **Trust SIMPLNX (or 6.5.172).** The legacy 6.5.171 output for non-hex features is mathematically meaningless — the c-axis is a hex-specific concept and asking "how far is this cubic cell's c-axis from the feature's avg c-axis" has no defined answer. The `NaN` produced by SIMPLNX is the correct signal that the question is ill-posed for the feature.

---

> ## ComputeFeatureReferenceCAxisMisorientationsFilter-D4

Reviewer: Unclear numbering scheme it goes from D1 straight to D4

Author: Good Catch.
